But step timing, you couldn't, and George Powell's died from.
Right.
However, I understand that somebody else is now contemplating making one.
In fact, they're working on the treatment right now.
Wonder if it'll have Bo Derek in it like the new Tarzan movie's gonna have.
Yeah, I don't think the Tarzan movie ever comes out.
Yeah, again, as David said, we'll want to keep it real informal.
And what we're shooting for in our national form started, okay.
Tapes rolling.
Mr. Farmer, how'd you get started writing science fiction?
Well, I started reading science fiction when I was seven years old.
I'm 63 now.
And I knew I always wanted to be a writer.
Well, I didn't do much about it for many years.
The funny thing is, I actually intended to become a mainstream writer.
That is, to write stories which are not in particular genre.
But somehow, I just just did into science fiction.
And sold my first science fiction story in 1952.
That was called The Lovers.
It was a novel that was published in a magazine.
And it's generally credited with breaking the taboo against the mature use of sex in science fiction magazine.
And I've been writing since 1952, but I always held a job down up until 1969.
I was a tech writer for the McDonald Douglas Company working for the space industry.
I was in Los Angeles when, a month before the first moon landing,
they laid off the thousands and thousands of workers in the space defense industry, you may recall that.
And like all the rest, I was out of a job.
But I'd been writing all those years, weekends, evenings.
I had a pretty good backlog and built up something of a reputation by then.
So I decided to freelance.
And I found a job.
It would have been a very good job with a civilian outfit.
But I said to the heck with it, and became a freelancer.
And it's been so since about June 1969.
You mentioned that The Lovers was your first work.
And it, and you did make...
45, I think.
You mentioned that it was known for breaking the taboos.
Did you consciously set out to write such a story, or is that just how it developed?
No, I had an idea for a story, and I couldn't write it unless I broke the taboos.
I didn't really consciously set out to do it because I had the idea, and I thought it was terrific.
On the other hand, I knew I was going to have a lot of trouble getting as accepted.
I did. I did have a lot of trouble.
The first editor I sent it to, John Campbell, who was the editor of The Stounding,
was the most prestigious and highest paying market.
Naturally, I sent it to him first.
And he returned it with a comment that I'm not a editing.
So I sent it to Horace Gold, who was editing Galaxy, which was equally prestigious and had about the same word rates.
His comments were something like John Campbell's.
Then I sent it to Samuel Mayans, who was editor of a magazine called Starling Stories.
He immediately accepted it and knew it was a revolutionary breakthrough.
He published it and I was on my way.
Accepted the next story I wrote was also equally revolutionary.
It took me a year before I could get anybody to accept it.
A lot of your other stories in that time opened to me.
My sister and flesh and mother come to mind as stories in the same vein.
Can you talk a little longer?
Yes, I can.
You've also written a number of pieces that revolve around a religious theme.
The first story, The Lovers.
And then the book that just came out, Father to the Stars, the stories of Father John Carmody, which had finally been collected.
A Woman of Day, Jesus on Mars.
Do you have strong feelings about religion, one way or the other, to include it in your work so much?
Well, I must.
I was sent to Sunday school when I was very little and I became interested in the Bible and I read it on my own.
And I even read the Book of Mormon when I was about nine years old.
And I always wrestled all my life with the problems of immortality, tree destination, grace, gastro-life and all that sort of stuff.
I was raised as a Christian scientist up until the time I was about twelve.
And then I was sent to a Presbyterian church where there was a conflict between Christian science and the Presbyterian idea of predestination.
And then when I was about sixteen, I guess I became an atheist.
I've gone through atheism, through agnosticism, and then I was converted to the disciples of Christ.
Then I backslid, all from grace, as the theological term goes.
And then I lapsed back into agnosticism.
My present situation is that without immortality life has no meaning.
If there's a creation there must be a creator.
But I've become tremendously interested in what is sometimes referred to as mythism.
It isn't really like the Muslims, the Muslims Sufism school.
Then a lot of related stuff like that.
You might see right now I'm in a sort of a limbo, heading towards something I don't know what.
But anyway, my interest in religion has manifested itself throughout all my work.
Although a lot of people when they say the name farmer immediately think of sex in a book,
the fact is I've written much more about religion than about sex.
Or sometimes both at the same time.
Something in some respects, sex and religion are two sides of the same coin.
In certain fields of activity.
Father John.
You're doing fine, yeah.
Okay, I'll do another question now.
Father John Carmody seems to be making a comeback.
Will there be more stories of him appearing pretty soon?
There will be, but not soon.
Because I've got so many contracts and so many ideas for other stories.
It'll be a couple of years before I get around to it.
See, when I wrote the last Father John Carmody story about the Roman Catholic interstellar priest,
that must have been at least 15 years ago, and I left the poor guy up and hanging up in the middle of space
with an egg growing from his chest.
I always wanted to bring him down and write about three more stories and finish up that series.
The one thing is, by actual count, I started 15 series and never really finished any of them.
So it depends on how long I live, whether I finish it or not.
You mentioned while I go that the afterlife has a bit of interest for you inside, outside,
and of course the river world books come to mind here.
Are these related in any way?
Uh, you mean are they related in that they're in the same universe?
Yeah, you took the idea, the afterlife idea, and it diverged in the two different ways.
Yeah, that's what I've done.
I've varied the idea or done variations on the same theme, you might say, as far as afterlife goes.
Well, if you think about it, there could be a million different possibilities in an afterlife, in their work.
But one of my perhaps un-stated themes is that immortality may not depend upon a supernatural being.
That's the evolutionary drive of a man for him to invent immortality himself.
The drawback to that is, those people who are already dead will remain dead, right?
So that doesn't correspond to the religious idea of immortality, where everybody is raised from the first human being to the last one.
I like to do a lot of variations on that.
I have a new book coming out in Pesms in September called The Un-Reasoning Mask.
That's the quotation you will be picked.
And this is concerned with theology, astral life, immortality.
You might call it a philosophical, theological space opera.
I don't sort of ever really abandon that theme, but then again, that's just one of the many things I have in my work.
One of the reasons I've had trouble in the early days, I think, really becoming identified and getting banned of followers is that I didn't beat on just one or two drums.
I've arranged all over the field.
I've written a lot of what I would call venture science fiction, in addition to experimental science fiction, theological, philosophical, sexual, biological, you name it.
What I find out is if I do a variety of stuff and don't get tired, each new novel is a new challenge.
I'm not just working the same old theme again.
Will you continue to do some River World stories?
I know the novels are finished, but what about the stories?
Well, what I did in the first Four Books of the River World series was I wrote the Magic Labyrinth, and that presumably answered the questions about the main mystery throughout the Four Books.
But the River World concept is so big, perhaps for those who aren't familiar with it, I should say that it concerns the planet in which there's a 10 million mile long river which follows the valley.
Everybody has lived from about 150,000 B.C. to about 1883 A.D. was resurrected along the Bangsley River in rejuvenated form, looked like they were 25.
The main mystery behind the whole thing was why were all these people resurrected? Who did it and how?
That was answered in the final one, but the thing is that there are so many themes that I wanted to explore during the course of those four novels, but I couldn't do it because I would have slowed the story down too much.
I wasn't taking too many side tracks, you might say, and I'd still be working on that particular series.
So what I want to do is to write two more books in which I can extrapolate various themes that I couldn't give any attention to during the course of the four books.
I didn't go into any detail on how you could work out viable societies with people from every place and every time.
I also wanted to bring up in depth what would happen to famous people on that planet.
Like, uh, what would Karl Marx think for instance, if he could see what had happened to ideas and comedies?
Marx and that, uh, okay, yeah, I just started with Karl Marx. Okay, we're on the air now, Mr. Farmer.
Uh, yeah, okay, your voice is fading away again.
Okay, it's my fault because I had the phone away from me. Okay, let's go now.
Well, there's Karl Marx for instance, uh, what would he think of what happened to his ideas about communism on the planet Earth after he died?
Leonardo da Vinci, his ideas about art, what's the fact that he's on a planet where there are very few pigments available for instance for him to paint?
What would he do there?
Um, I also wanted to bring up various figures from science and the military and philosophy and so forth and show what they would do there.
Now, one of the things about the river world was that although you were born, uh, actually they weren't, although you were resurrected there in a youthful body of your own,
as it was in 25 or earlier if you died before 25, uh, if you did, for instance, you were 83 when you were dying, when your mind was still 83 and you have 83 years of experience on Earth behind you.
Uh, now, is your character formed? Are you going to go through perhaps a thousand years being the same person?
Or are you going to improve? But it's evident in this, in the river world series that, uh, some ethical standards are being set by unknown people and that it's up to each individual to advance in a mental and spiritual state to progress.
Uh, what I tried to point out was that some people were absolutely incapable of progressing, they remained fixed, others regressed and a few progressed.
So, uh, I wanted to show that theme too. As a matter of fact, there would be about 25 or 30 things that I couldn't develop in the four books of the main series.
Uh, there was a lot that happened on the two boats, the one to develop the society of the two boats, for instance, they went up the river.
I could have a lot of fun with that.
So, uh, I plan on writing two more, what I call, side-stream stories.
Stories take place in the river world, but they're not connected with the main mystery.
Just allow me to develop things that I couldn't otherwise.
Also, I made a lot of people mad at me.
Uh, because of that last sentence, or paragraph, I should say, I wrote in the Magic Labyrinth, everything seems to have been settled.
Uh, everything has been cleared up, and then one of the, uh, characters, the kind of minor one, Peter Juris Frigate,
he's celebrating with the others in the mystery tar when he thinks he hears a football outside in the hallway,
goes out, comes back, and says to the others, they didn't see anyone, it must have been my imagination.
A lot of readers got mad at me because they thought, oh no, he's going to write another one.
He's leaving a loophole. Well, I am leaving a loophole.
I don't know whether I'll go through it or not, but it's quite possible that the Magic Labyrinth wasn't the final one in that series before,
that everything that our protagonist learns and everything that everybody else learns is completely untrue, or half-true.
But I haven't decided whether I'll go on or not. In any event, I'm going to write two side-stream stories about the river world.
Your mind must be a vast storehouse of these historical characters, because in the river world books, you really provide a lot of background about them.
That must interest you as well.
Well, uh, well, you see, I did research on them, of course, but on the other hand, I've been doing research all my life,
because like a majority of science fiction writers, I'm a very voracious reader, not just in the fields of science, but all fields.
And I've always been interested in history and biography.
So much so that I think that that's what led me into starting genealogical research, which has recently been in my own family.
And I found out and I can prove that I'm descended from Abraham Lincoln's great-great-grandfather and Daniel Boone's aunt.
That kind of tickled me when I found that out.
But that's just one more evidence of my interest in history and biography.
I did give a lot of detail about a lot of historical figures there, but I also, you know, once in a while, slipped in very brief mentions of obscure figures in history.
I guess it would take a historian to recognize them right away, and it doesn't matter if you don't.
I just like to play that little game.
You've also written a lot about Tarzan, our Tarzan-like protagonist, and as a matter of fact, Tarzan seems to be related to a lot of historical figures too.
How did you get interested in the Tarzan or Tarzan-like characters, and then this idea of having them being related to everybody else from the pulp era and whatnot?
I first read Tarzan when I guess I was about seven or eight years old, and I became wrapped up in that early age with the words of, like, your rice burrows.
But when I started college, I kind of lost interest in reading music more, but I was in Los Angeles.
I really reprinted the Doc Savage books. Doc Savage was the pulp fiction hero, the early 30s, 40s.
When they started reprinting those books, I started reading them again.
And of course, not being young anymore and having read a great deal, I could see the flaws in them.
Type of writing, I heard, but they were still a lot of fun.
And I started reading books about Tarzan again, and this time, although I still kept a lot of my childhood interest in them,
I had a sense of wonder about them. I began seeing things in Tarzan, for instance, and I had not seen before.
It was not just a creature, or an ant, pardon me, what I bet it is.
It was not just a child who'd been cast away and raised by great apes and then become a creature of the jungle,
and then returned to claim his fortune. He was sort of an archetype of many, many heroes from classical myth.
And now, I'm sure that when Burroughs wrote this, he didn't know what he was doing, but he did it unconsciously.
I think that in the creation of Tarzan, he was just a genius.
Burroughs is not a great writer, but he has created a great character just like Acorn and Doyle is not a great writer,
but he created a great character, Sherlock Holmes.
I started delving into the mythology and found many striking resemblances between Tarzan and the heroes of the ancient Greek myths,
and the Sumerian and the Babylonian, and so forth.
Also, I've always read a lot of anthropology, a lot of folklore.
It was a great deal resemblance between Tarzan and various figures in North American, Indian folklore, and African folklore, and so forth.
And at the same time, I started, well, I never really had to quit reading Sherlock Holmes,
but I found out about the Baker Street Journal, which publishes, it's quarterly, and it publishes scholarly, pseudo-scholarly, articles about Holmes.
Okay.
Then I came across a biography of Scarlett Tempernell.
This is the first of biographies about fictional characters making the assumption that these people really lived.
Then I came across the Bering Bulls biography of Sherlock Holmes, and the biography of Miro Woff.
So I thought, well, ain't Greek.
I'll write a biography of Tarzan.
Now, the assumption there is that he really lived, and once you make that assumption that he's not a fictional character,
then immediately you have to reconcile all of discrepancies and the novels about Tarzan.
You have to investigate his background.
You have to write it as if it were a detailed work of research, which, by the way, it was.
Ted Sturgeon said that I didn't know working in my biography of Tarzan to earn any 12 PhDs or degrees.
That's true, but I had a lot of fun with it.
Then I started seeing various resemblances between Tarzan and the other characters.
So the first thing you know, I had conceived this idea of what I call the Wall Newton family, which is almost all the great characters of the fiction.
A lot of history.
We're descended from the Scarlett Tempernell.
And I drew up a genealogical map, table, and then I explained it in various dependencies.
And then when I did my Doc Savage biography, I extended that genealogical table.
Proving Tarzan is related to, not only Scarlett Tempernell, but Sherlock Holmes, and Newell Wolfe, or Lord Peter Wimsey.
One of the heroes of Jack London novel.
And on and on and on.
I had a lot of fun with it, and apparently the readers did too.
On the other hand, I really believed Tarzan is alive.
I believe Kilgore Trout is related to some people in the Wall Newton family, isn't he?
Boy, a man of his great genius has to be.
He's in the genealogical chart in the Doc Savage book, I think, the Revised Book.
You seem to identify a bit with Kilgore Trout.
Well, the reason for that is, well, in the first place, I was a fan of Sonic, as you know, I like all those books.
But Kilgore Trout really turned me on because his early experiences, as a matter of fact, his later ones, too,
were like a lot of my early experiences, and a lot of the experiences with many other science fiction writers back in the old days,
weren't being paid much, and science fiction was looked down upon.
And we were being taken due to our inexperience with various publishers and agents.
I also had a tough time getting any recognition.
So, I guess that's why you identified with him.
What's the fact that he's a great character?
I believe I...
That's somewhat sad.
I believe I recall that you were going to write The Son of Jimmy Valentine.
Wasn't that Trout's one and only dirty book?
It was his...not only his one and only specifically erotic book, it was also his only non-science fiction book.
But Vonnegut...I don't know what is his reaction to the art of the novel itself, but...
So many people thought, and he'd written it, and he'd tell you hundreds and maybe thousands of places.
Then the reviews came out.
Tom said, Venus on the hash shelf, I killed her, Trout.
It was the worst thing he'd written, and others said it was the best thing he'd ever written.
When I applied for permission to write The Son of Jimmy Valentine, which I really would have loved to have done,
I could have had a lot of fun with it.
He said, no.
Which is his bureaucracy?
However, that didn't stop me from writing about fiction and authors.
In the Venus on the hash shelf, the protagonist, Simon Lagstaff, had his favorite science fiction authors.
Just as in Vonnegut's books, Elliot Rose Water, thought that Gilbert Trout was the greatest living writer in any field.
He should have been president of the US, he couldn't have solved all the problems.
Well anyway, in Venus on the hash shelf, Simon Lagstaff liked to read the science fiction works of a fellow called Jonathan Swiss Summers III.
And I describe his various works, or outlinem, and give the titles.
But Jonathan Swiss Summers, who's a fiction author, wrote about a giant German shepherd police dog whose IQ had been raised to about 200 in a laboratory, and he became a private detective.
Now, I plan eventually someday on writing a book by Ralph von Baubau, this dog, under the name of Ralph von Baubau.
And then maybe I'll end the cycle by having Ralph von Baubau write about a human named Vonnegut, something like that, and completing it, going right back to Vonnegut again.
I hope I'm making myself clear.
I believe Gilbert Trout has a cousin named Leo Tencrouter that does some writing too, doesn't he?
Yeah, Leo Quik-Quig Tencrouter.
Well, as a matter of fact, I wrote some stories about, and with Tencrouter figured, as a character, and I outlined two of his stories.
And then later on, lo and behold, this story appeared in an anthology by Robert Silverberg, in which he collaborated with me.
It's called A Cyrus and Crutches.
See, this could go on and on.
I mean, every time you write a story under a nom de plume, that of a fictional author, let's say Gilbert Trout or David Copperfield, these fictional authors can write about their fictional authors, and then you can write stories in which these fictional authors have written stories.
In other words, you can go through various stages.
Like, Vonnegut wrote about Gilbert Trout.
I wrote a book by Gilbert Trout.
Gilbert Trout's book describes a science fiction author who had a character in his stories.
This character writes his story, and so on and so on.
One of the funny things about this is that I found out that I could use the fictional author device to break a writing block.
I had a writing block once, that terrible thing that sometimes happens to writers.
They don't know what caused it, for some reason.
They might have many ideas, be eager to go, but when they sit down in front of a typewriter, nothing happens.
Well, that happened to me once.
I never thought it would. I thought I was immune to such a thing.
But it did.
And after a wrestling for two months and getting in no place, I had an idea.
I sat down with a typewriter and wrote a story, not by Philip Ozy Farmer, but by David Copperfield, I'd say.
I don't remember which particular nom de plume it is.
The story poured out.
Very good.
I thought so anyway.
When I'd completed that, the writing block was gone.
See, I wasn't writing then as me, Philip Ozy Farmer, but as I say, Gilbert Trout.
And I was in his shoes. I had no trouble.
The funny thing about this is, it's a psychological trick that I'm conscious of.
And yet it works.
It's not like I'm trying to trick my unconscious, but I must be doing it one way or another.
Well, I don't know of anybody else who's ever broken a writer's block in that manner, but I recommend trying it.
Will you be moving on to the mainstream, as it was once reported, that you might be considering?
Well, as I said, when I started out writing, I wanted to be a mainstream writer.
Back in my youthful, foolish days, I had aspirations to be the American.
Toskiesky, or Nusmalville, all that sort of stuff.
I'm not confined to science fiction. I have written some stuff that wasn't for the mainstream.
And I got this idea about two years ago for writing a mainstream novel, which would be called Pearl Diving in Old Curia.
And this would take place in Curia, Illinois, where I lived, would be in the early 50s.
But I regard as containing the seed of the movement, which later on became very manifest in the 60s,
a shift in the zeitgeist and the attitude at the time.
And some ways, Curia, the city where I've lived most of my life, will be a sort of a protagonist, I'd say.
But it's a novel.
It's not in the documentary.
I have great hopes for it.
In any event, next year I'm going to write it.
And I sold two mainstream stories to Playboy and one to Mystery Magazine.
Back in 57, I wrote a mainstream novel called Fire in the Night about racial relations in the steel mill,
which is obviously based on the steel mill, which is right outside Peoria, and where I worked for 11 years.
So, yes, I want to get into mainstream.
Oh, I don't intend to quit writing science fiction.
I have too many ideals for science fiction stories to quit.
I have enough to keep me going if I live to be a hundred.
Every day I keep getting new ones.
New ideas.
Where do you see science fiction going?
Well, a lot of people ask me that question.
Science fiction is going where it's always been going.
It's going to, I think, become more popular, at least maintain it's popularity.
There will be various...
In some ways it will remain the same in that there will be hardcore science stories.
Stories extrapolate scientific principles.
There will be sociological, sexual, psychological, science fiction and so forth.
And I can't say that it will go in any particular direction if you're talking about change and things.
Right now science fiction covers all the things that are possible.
But there is human imagination that sets us...
We'll be able to develop new variations and also new concepts out of the old things.
Yes, I hope you're not thinking about science fiction movies.
I'm talking about the literature itself, you're right.
Right, yeah, that's what we're talking about too.
But the movies have been taking in the direction...
In the...
Star Wars, if you know what I mean, for instance.
As interest is a lot of people in making science fiction movies.
For the first time really in this field, in the movie making field,
we're getting some people who know what science fiction is all about.
In the past, with a few exceptions,
we've had producers and directors who thought, well, we'll make a science fiction movie.
And they were basing their idea of science fiction strictly on what I would call horror literature.
Monster literature.
Well, now I think there's an indication that we're going to get very good science fiction movies,
which will be based on philosophical, sociological concepts.
I'm not putting Star Wars down because I loved it, I saw it seven times.
And really had a great time with it.
And I'm very grateful that Lucas made it because Lucas was a person who knew science fiction and loved it.
And he made a movie which is strictly out of the 30s and 40s.
Both.
Science fiction both.
It's a magnificent job.
But the success of that is going to encourage other producers not to imitate it,
if I may be fatal,
but to try some of the hundreds and hundreds of good stories that exist in science fiction.
The novel, which will be acceptable by the general audience because they are getting conditioned now to thinking differently.
And they're noticing in the Star Wars they never stop to explain things like space war or that sort of stuff.
They just did it and they found they find out it's not necessary to explain it.
There's a certain parallel to science fiction magazine stories when they first started.
When Hugo Grimsbeck, we had Air Wonder and Science Wonder,
started magazine science fiction.
His authors always felt compelled to stop and explain just what was happening in Greek detail,
thereby slowing the story down and it really wasn't necessary anyway.
Well, movies, I think in the future, are going to accept this concept.
And they're going to take the position that the movie audience is really more intelligent than they've given the credit for before.
And the moviegoers are going to be able to accept these concepts.
And therefore we're going to get much better science fiction movies than they've had in the past.
Also, unfortunately, we're going to get a lot more bad ones because there are a lot of imitators out there.
They say it's something that makes Star Wars interesting.
I think, oh boy, then they make a bad imitation.
But on the other hand, I'm going to get a good one too.
At least that's my idea.
Mr. Farmer, I believe that about does it from Irene.
Yeah, it's been fun for me.